>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 28:
CAMPAIGN 2016 GOES NATIONAL, AS
THE CANDIDATES CRISS-CROSS A
DOZEN STATES BEFORE SUPER
TUESDAY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT: THE
BOOMING SOLAR POWER INDUSTRY
FACES A FIGHT FOR ITS LIFE IN
ONE OF AMERICA'S SUNNIEST
STATES.
>> I WAS HERE TWO WEEKS AGO WITH
550 OF OUR PEOPLE AND WE
BASICALLY SAID, 'GUYS, WE HAVE
NO WORK FOR YOU.
WE HAVE NO WORK FOR YOU.'"
>> Sreenivasan: AND, AN EMERGING
ETHIOPIAN FILMMAKER PROVIDES A
UNIQUE LOOK AT HIS COUNTRY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
CAMPAIGN 2016 IS IN THE FLY-BY
PHASE BEFORE PRIMARIES AND
CAUCUSES IN A DOZEN STATES TWO
DAYS FROM NOW, INCLUDING SEVEN
SOUTHERN STATES.
TODAY, DEMOCRAT HILLARY CLINTON
CAMPAIGNED IN TENNESSEE AND
ARKANSAS, WHILE HER LONE RIVAL,
VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS,
WAS IN MINNESOTA, COLORADO, AND
OKLAHOMA.
THE REPUBLICANS-- BUSINESSMAN
DONALD TRUMP, FLORIDA SENATOR
MARCO RUBIO, TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ, OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH,
AND DOCTOR BEN CARSON--
CAMPAIGNED ACROSS THE SOUTH FROM
GEORGIA TO OKLAHOMA, AND UP
NORTH IN MASSACHUSETTS.
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
CLINTON IS RIDING MOMENTUM FROM
LAST NIGHT'S LANDSLIDE WIN IN
SOUTH CAROLINA.
SHE WON 73.5% OF THE VOTE TO 26%
FOR SANDERS, AND CAPTURED 39 OF
THE 53 DELEGATES.
CLINTON HAS 544 TOTAL DELEGATES,
INCLUDING 453 SUPERDELEGATES,
THOSE PARTY OFFICIALS WHO VOTE
ON THE NOMINEE AT THE NATIONAL
CONVENTION.
SANDERS HAS 85 TOTAL DELEGATES.
2,383 ARE NEEDED TO WIN.
LAST NIGHT, CLINTON SOUNDED LIKE
SHE WAS POSITIONING HERSELF FOR
THE GENERAL ELECTION, POSSIBLY
AGAINST TRUMP.
>> WE DON'T NEED TO MAKE AMERICA
GREAT AGAIN.
AMERICA NEVER STOPPED BEING
GREAT.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER WINNING IN
SOUTH CAROLINA, NEVADA, AND NEW
HAMPSHIRE, TRUMP LEADS THE
REPUBLICAN DELEGATE COUNT, WITH
82.
CRUZ HAS 17, RUBIO, 16, KASICH,
6 AND CARSON, 4.
1,237 DELEGATES ARE NEEDED TO
WIN THE REPUBLICAN NOMINATION.
CRUZ AND RUBIO RELEASED THEIR
TAX RETURNS YESTERDAY AND ARE
PRESSING TRUMP TO DO THE SAME.
>> DONALD TRUMP IS CLEARLY
HIDING SOMETHING, AND IT'S
PROBABLY THE FACT THAT HE
DOESN'T MAKE AS MUCH MONEY AS HE
SAYS HE DOES.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, TRUMP
SAID HE'S NOT READY TO RELEASE
EVEN A SUMMARY OF HIS RETURNS,
BECAUSE THE I.R.S. IS AUDITING
HIM FOR AT LEAST THE TENTH TIME.
>> UNTIL THE AUDIT IS COMPLETED,
OBVIOUSLY I WOULDN'T SHOW
ANYTHING, I'LL SHOW IT AS SOON
AS IT'S COMPLETED.
I HAVE NOTHING TO HIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, KASICH
LAMENTED THE PERSONAL INSULTS
DOMINATING THE RHETORIC FROM
TRUMP, CRUZ, AND RUBIO.
>> THE WAY IN WHICH YOU BEAT
SOMEBODY LIKE DONALD TRUMP IS
NOT WRESTLING IN THE MUD WITH
HIM, BUT RATHER TALKING ABOUT
YOUR RECORD, YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENTS, AND YOUR
VISION.
>> Sreenivasan: AT STAKE TUESDAY
ARE ROUGHLY ONE-FOURTH OF THE
DELEGATES EACH PARTY HAS TO
CHOOSE ITS PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE.
THE CEASE-FIRE IN SYRIA BROKERED
BY THE UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA
IS SHOWING CRACKS ON ITS SECOND
DAY.
SYRIA'S CAPITAL OF DAMASCUS WAS
CALM, BUT OPPOSITION GROUPS
CLAIMED SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD HAS VIOLATED THE TRUCE.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAID TODAY THERE WERE AIR
STRIKES ON TWO NORTHERN SYRIAN
VILLAGES, BUT DIDN'T KNOW WHO
CARRIED THEM OUT.
THE CEASE-FIRE COVERS GOVERNMENT
FORCES AND OPPOSITION GROUPS,
BUT NOT MILITANTS OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP, OR ISIS, OR THE
NUSRA FRONT, AN AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE.
JOINING ME NOW BY SKYPE FROM
TURKEY TO TALK ABOUT THE SYRIAN
TRUCE IS "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER LIZ SLY.
LIZ, THE TRUCE HAS BEEN UP FOR
MORE THAN 24 HOURS.
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING TODAY?
>> IT'S LOOKING A LITTLE BIT
WOBBLY TODAY.
WE HAVE HAD QUITE A FEW RUSSIAN
AIR STRIKES, NOT AS MANY AS
UNUSUAL BUT THE NUMBER IN THE
NORTH OF THE COUNTRY TO LET
PEOPLE KNOW THAT THE AIR STRIKES
ARE BACK.
AND THERE HAS BEEN SOME QUITE
SIGNIFICANT FIGHTING IN THE EAST
OF THE COUNTRY WHICH IS SOME
WHAT SEPARATE FROM THE SYRIAN
TRUCE.
THIS IS ISLAMIC STATE ATTACKING
AMERICA'S KURDISH ALLIES IN THE
NORTH.
AND AMERICAN WARPLANES HAVE HAD
TO GO AND RESCUE THEM FROM WHAT
LOOKED LIKE QUITE A NASTY
SITUATION.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE ISLAMIC
STATE WAS NOT PARTY TO THE
TRUCE.
>> RIGHT, AND PRETTY OF THE DAY
BEFORE THE TRUCE THEY STORMED
INTO A NORTHERN TOWN IN THE
KURDISH SELF-PROCLAIMED
AUTONOMOUS REGION THAT THEY ARE
CARVING OUT UP THERE.
AND THEY PRETTY MUCH TOOK
CONTROL OF THE TOWN FOR A FEW
HOURS, THEY TOOK OVER SEVERAL
BUILDINGS, THEY RAMPAGED THROUGH
THE TOWN, THEY BEHEADED A TRIBAL
LEADER AND U.S. AIRPLANES WERE
CALLED IN AND CARRIED OUT A
LARGE NUMBER OF STRIKES HITTING
THEIR POSITIONS AND TAKING IT
BACK FOR MOST OF THE TOWN BUT WE
UNDERSTAND THERE ARE STILL
ISLAMIC STATE PEOPLE THERE,
PERHAPS HOLDING SOME HOSTAGES.
>> Sreenivasan: DO THE REBEL
GROUPS THAT ARE PARTY TO THIS
BELIEVE THAT THIS TRUCE IS A
STEPPING STONE TO THE LONGER
LASTING PEACE, OR DO THEY THINK
IT'S A TACTICAL MOVE BY ASSAD
AND THE RUSSIANS.
>> WELL, THE REBELS ARE
EXTREMELY SUSPICIOUS.
THE GOVERNMENT HELPED BY THE
RUSSIANS NOW HAS THE UPPER HAND
OF FIGHTING IN SYRIA.
THEY HAVE BEEN MAKING A LOT OF
ADVANCES.
NOBODY REALLY SEES WHAT INTEREST
IT IS FOR THE SYRIANS AT THE
MOMENT, TO ABIDE BY A TRUCE TO
HOLD THEIR GAINS.
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
IT CLEAR IT BELIEVES WITH THE
RUSSIAN SUPPORT IT CAN WIN THIS
FIGHT COMPLETELY.
SO YES, A LOT OF REBELS ARE
DEEPLY SUSPICIOUS BUT AT THE
SAME TIME THEY ARE ON THE BACK
FOOT, THEY ARE NOT NEARLY IN A
POSITION AT THE MOMENT TO
CHALLENGE THE TRUCE AND IT COULD
POTENTIALLY WORK TO THEIR
ADVANTAGE IF IT DOES-- THE FRONT
LINES WHERE THEY ARE RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
IDEA THAT IN MARCH 7th THE
U.N. CAN TRY TO RESTART PEACE
TALKS.
IS ANYBODY ON THE GROUND
THINKING THAT FAR AHEAD?
>> AFTER WHAT WE HAVE SEEN TODAY
WITH U.S. AIR STRIKES, NEW
FIGHTING, I THINK MOST PEOPLE
ARE A BIT WORRIED THAT THE TRUCE
WON'T HOLD LONG ENOUGH.
I THINK THE POWERS ARE REALLY
VERY DETERMINED TO HAVE THIS
HAPPEN AND THEY COULD WELL USHER
THEIR ALLIES ON THE GROUND TO
THOSE TALKS EVEN IF THE FIGHTING
DOES START UP AGAIN.
>> LIZ SLY OF "THE WASHINGTON
POST," JOINING US VIA SKYPE,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: RUSSIAN
AUTHORITIES HAVE HALTED RESCUE
OPERATIONS AT A COAL MINE WHERE
GAS EXPLOSIONS KILLED 36 PEOPLE.
A METHANE GAS LEAK TRIGGERED THE
EXPLOSIONS THURSDAY IN A MINE
NORTH OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE.
THE MINE COLLAPSED, BUT RESCUERS
SAVED 81 MINERS TRAPPED
UNDERGROUND.
ANOTHER EXPLOSION TODAY KILLED
FIVE RESCUERS BEFORE THE
OPERATION WAS CALLED OFF.
SHOULD AMERICANS BE WORRIED THAT
AGING VOTING MACHINES COULD
MALFUNCTION IN THE PRIMARIES OR
IN THE NOVEMBER ELECTION?
READ MORE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE 2010, THE
NUMBER OF AMERICAN HOMES WITH
ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS HAS GROWN
ALMOST 20 TIMES OVER, FROM
48,000 HOMES SIX YEARS AGO TO
MORE THAN 900,000 HOMES TODAY.
FEDERAL AND STATE GOVERNMENT
INCENTIVES, AS WELL AS A DROP IN
THE COST OF SOLAR PANELS, HAVE
FUELED THE INDUSTRY'S GROWTH,
BUT ACROSS THE COUNTRY
TRADITIONAL UTILITY COMPANIES--
SEEING SOLAR AS A THREAT-- ARE
CHALLENGING THE FINANCIAL
BENEFITS HOMEOWNERS HAVE COME TO
EXPECT WHEN THEY GENERATE THEIR
OWN ELECTRICITY.
ONE PLACE THIS BATTLE IS PLAYING
OUT IS NEVADA, WHERE HIGHER
UTILITY CHARGES FOR ROOFTOP
SOLAR ARE NOW TAKING EFFECT.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
LARSON REPORTS ON THOSE CHANGES
AND HOW THEY MIGHT AFFECT THE
FUTURE OF SOLAR POWER ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO TAKE IT!
WE'RE NOT GOING TO TAKE IT!
>> Reporter: THE RHETORIC IN
NEVADA SOUNDS, AT TIMES, LESS
LIKE TESTIMONY ON ELECTRICITY
RATES AND MORE LIKE THE RUN UP
TO A LAS VEGAS PRIZE FIGHT.
>> WE SHOULD BE PROMOTING SOLAR
ENERGY, NOT DESTROYING IT!
>> TALK TO YOUR REPRESENTATIVES
AND FIX THIS!
>> Reporter: THAT'S BECAUSE THE
CLASH BETWEEN THE STATE'S MOST
POWERFUL ELECTRICAL UTILITY, NV
ENERGY, AND THE SURGING SOLAR
POWER INDUSTRY HAS ALL THE
MAKINGS OF A HEAVYWEIGHT BOUT.
>> WE BAIT AND SWITCHED ON OUR
OWN CITIZENS!
>> Reporter: AT STAKE IS THE
FUTURE OF SOLAR ENERGY IN ONE OF
THE SUNNIEST PLACES IN THE
COUNTRY.
AND HOW THAT WILL AFFECT
EVERYDAY NEVADANS, LIKE PAT AND
CRAIG CARRELL.
>> THE DAY WE MOVED HERE, THE
TEMPERATURE WAS 115 DEGREES, SO
THAT WAS A WELCOME TO NEVADA.
>> Reporter: FORMER ACADEMICS,
THE CARRELLS MOVED TO A
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY OUTSIDE OF
LAS VEGAS IN 2002.
WHAT DID YOU NOTICE ABOUT THE
ENERGY BILLS AS IT CREPT TOWARDS
SUMMER?
>> THEY CREPT HIGHER AND THE AIR
CONDITIONING KICKS IN, AND OUR
BILLS, OVER TIME ROSE TO
OVER $450.
>> Reporter: A MONTH?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: TO REDUCE THEIR
ELECTRIC BILL, THE CARRELLS
ADDED INSULATION TO THE ATTIC
AND SUNBLOCKING ULTRAVIOLET FILM
TO THE WINDOWS.
THEN IN 2014, THEY DECIDED TO GO
SOLAR.
>> SO WE'VE GOT PANELS UP THERE
AND THERE.
>> Reporter: THE CARRELLS SPENT
$45,000 DOLLARS ON ROOF SOLAR
PANELS FOR THEIR TWO-BEDROOM
HOME.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT REBATES AND
CREDITS FROM THE ENERGY COMPANY
REDUCED THEIR OUT-OF-POCKET
COST BY MORE THAN 40%, AND THEY
EXPECTED THE REST OF THE
INVESTMENT TO PAY FOR ITSELF
THROUGH LOWER ELECTRIC BILLS.
ON AVERAGE, THEIR BILLS DROPPED
BY ABOUT 95%.
SO IN THE HOTTEST DAYS OF THE
SUMMER, WHAT YOU HAD BEEN PAYING
$400 OR MORE, NOW WHAT WAS IT?
>> THAT'S WHEN IT WENT DOWN TO
ABOUT $15.
>> Reporter: THEIR BILL WAS SO
LOW, BECAUSE THEIR SOLAR PANELS
PRODUCED MOST OF THEIR POWER,
AND BECAUSE OF A SPECIAL
ARRANGEMENT WITH THE UTILITY
COMPANY CALLED NET METERING.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, NET METERING
ALLOWS CUSTOMERS TO SELL EXCESS
POWER THEIR SOLAR PANELS
GENERATE DURING THE DAY TO THE
UTILITY COMPANY, AND BUY THE
POWER BACK AT NIGHT.
THAT, ALONG WITH FEDERAL AND
STATE INCENTIVES, HELPED NEVADA
INCREASE THE AMOUNT OF ROOFTOP
SOLAR INSTALLED FROM 2014 TO
2015 BY MORE THAN 400%, BECOMING
ONE OF THE FASTEST GROWING
SOLAR MARKETS IN THE COUNTRY.
FOR CUSTOMERS WORRIED ABOUT
CLIMATE CHANGE, ROOFTOP SOLAR IS
CARBON-FREE.
>> SO ONCE THEY INSPECT IT AND
IT PASSES INSPECTION, THREE TO
FOUR WEEKS AFTER THAT YOU CAN
TURN IT ON.
>> Reporter: IN A STATE WITH ONE
OF THE HIGHEST UNEMPLOYMENT
RATES IN THE NATION, NEVADA SAW
THOUSANDS OF NEW SOLAR-RELATED
JOBS-- SOME CREATED BY
SOLARCITY, THE NATION'S LARGEST
ROOFTOP SOLAR COMPANY, WHICH
WITH A STATE GRANT BUILT ITS
NATIONAL CUSTOMER CALL CENTER IN
LAS VEGAS.
>> YOU SEE ALL THE TRUCKS
SITTING HERE.
>> Reporter: MARCO KRAPELS IS
SOLARCITY'S EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT FOR STRATEGY.
>> NEVADA IS A GREAT STATE FOR
SOLAR.
THERE'S 320 DAYS OF SUNSHINE,
RISING UTILITY RATES.
AND WE'RE GIVING PEOPLE CHOICE
AND THE ABILITY TO FIX THEIR
COST OF POWER.
IT'S A FANTASTIC STATE.
>> Reporter: BUT KRAPELS SAYS
THE UTILITY HAS A MONOPOLY ON
ELECTRICITY THAT IS THREATENED
BY ROOFTOP SOLAR.
>> NOW SOLAR IS BECOMING REAL.
THE UTILITY MONOPOLIES ARE
SAYING, 'WELL WAIT A
MINUTE, 'WE'VE GOT TO CRUSH IT
BEFORE IT GETS TOO BIG.'
THEY WANT TO BUILD MORE PLANTS
SO THEY CAN MAKE MORE MONEY, AND
IF WE TAKE A LITTLE BITE OUT OF
THAT APPLE, AND WE SAY, ' ¡HEY
GUYS, WE'VE GOT SOLAR PANELS
EVERYWHERE ON ALL THESE HOMES,
YOU DON'T NEED TO BUILD THEM ANY
MORE POWER PLANTS.'
THEN THE UTILITY GOES, ' ¡WELL,
WAIT A MINUTE, HOW AM I GOING TO
MAKE MORE MONEY NEXT YEAR?'
>> Reporter: NOW, AFTER HEAVY
LOBBYING BY THE UTILITY COMPANY
AND SOLAR COMPANIES, NEVADA'S
SOLAR LANDSCAPE HAS CHANGED.
LAST DECEMBER 23, NEVADA'S THREE
MEMBER PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMISSION DECIDED, TO TRIPLE
THE BASIC SERVICE FEE FOR
ROOFTOP SOLAR FROM
$12.75 A MONTH, TO MORE THAN $38
A MONTH.
THE INCREASES BEGAN JANUARY 1
AND WILL BE FULLY PHASED IN OVER
12 YEARS.
THE COMMISSION ALSO DECIDED NV
ENERGY NO LONGER NEEDED TO
CREDIT CUSTOMERS WITH ROOFTOP
SOLAR THE RETAIL RATE FOR
ELECTRICITY, BUT INSTEAD WOULD
CREDIT THEM CLOSER TO THE
WHOLESALE RATE, A 75% CUT.
IN OTHER WORDS, THE POWER
COMPANY WILL GRADUALLY CHARGE
PEOPLE WITH ROOFTOP SOLAR MORE
TO BE CONNECTED TO THE GRID AND
THEN GIVE THEM LESS, A LOT LESS,
FOR THE POWER THEY GENERATE UP
ON THEIR ROOFS.
CITING THE PENDING RULE CHANGES,
NONE OF THE PUBLIC UTILITY
COMMISSIONERS WOULD AGREE TO AN
INTERVIEW.
BUT STAFF MEMBER ANNE MARIE
CUNEO, WHO DIRECTS REGULATORY
OPERATIONS FOR THE COMMISSION,
DID.
>> THE CUSTOMERS WHO ARE
PARTICIPATING IN NET METERING
WERE NOT SHARING IN THE COSTS OF
THE UTILITY'S DISTRIBUTION AND
TRANSMISSION SYSTEM, THE
PIPES AND THE WIRES THAT GET
THE ELECTRICITY TO YOUR HOME.
>> Reporter: CUNEO SAYS THE RATE
CHANGES WERE BASED ON DATA
PROVIDED BY NV ENERGY SHOWING
THAT SOLAR USERS WERE NOT PAYING
THEIR FAIR SHARE OF THE ELECTRIC
GRID'S OPERATING COSTS.
>> THEY WERE AVOIDING THOSE
COSTS, AND THOSE COSTS WERE
GETTING SHIFTED ONTO NON-
PARTICIPATING CUSTOMERS.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH COST WAS
BEING SHIFTED?
>> ACCORDING TO THE UTILITY'S
FIGURES, IT WAS ABOUT $16
MILLION A YEAR.
>> Reporter: NO ONE FROM NV
ENERGY WOULD AGREE TO AN
INTERVIEW, BUT IN A WRITTEN
STATEMENT TO THE NEWSHOUR, THE
COMPANY SAID, "THE NET METERING
DEBATE IS NOT ABOUT NV ENERGY
BEING PRO OR ANTI-SOLAR,
IT'S ABOUT WHO PAYS FOR SOLAR.
THE NEW NET METERING RULES AND
RATES ADOPTED IN NEVADA WILL
PHASE OUT THE SUBSIDY NON-SOLAR
CUSTOMERS PAY, WHICH WILL BE
$100 MILLION OVER THE
NEXT 12 YEARS."
ASHLEY BROWN IS THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE HARVARD
ELECTRICITY POLICY GROUP,
WHICH RECEIVES FUNDING FROM
UTILITY AND ENERGY COMPANIES.
HE BELIEVES ROOFTOP SOLAR OWNERS
ARE BEING PAID TOO MUCH FOR THE
ENERGY THEY SELL UTILITY
COMPANIES.
>> BECAUSE OF THE WAY IT'S
PRICED, WHICH IS YOU'RE
BASICALLY PAYING A RETAIL PRICE
FOR WHAT'S A WHOLESALE PRODUCT,
IT'S WAY OVERPRICED.
WHAT'S HAPPENED IS THE
ELECTRICITY MARKET HAS BECOME
FAR, FAR MORE COMPETITIVE.
WE'VE ALSO SEEN THE COST OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY DECLINING
DRAMATICALLY.
>> Reporter: OPPOSING SIDES
STRONGLY DISAGREE ON WHETHER
THERE REALLY IS A COST TO NON-
SOLAR OWNERS, AND IF THERE IS,
WHAT THAT COST MIGHT BE.
BUT LAST YEAR WHEN THE NEVADA
LEGISLATURE DIRECTED THE PUBLIC
UTILITY COMMISSION TO REVIEW THE
ISSUE, IT ASKED THE COMMISSION
TO CONSIDER ONLY THE COSTS OF
ROOFTOP SOLAR, BUT NONE OF ITS
BENEFITS.
SO, THE BENEFITS OF DISTRIBUTED
ROOFTOP SOLAR WEREN'T REALLY
WEIGHED INTO YOUR
RECOMMENDATION?
>> IT WASN'T, BECAUSE THIS
WASN'T A COST BENEFIT STUDY.
THIS WAS A COST STUDY.
AND WE WERE ATTEMPTING TO
DETERMINE WHAT SORT OF COST
SHIFT THERE WAS TO THE OTHER
CUSTOMERS.
>> Reporter: IN NEVADA'S THIRD-
LARGEST CITY, RENO, CUSTOMERS AT
ANOTHER SOLAR COMPANY, CALLED
SUNWORKS BEGAN PUTTING THEIR
ORDERS ON HOLD AS SOON AS THEY
HEARD OF THE RATE CHANGES.
>> WE'VE GOT HIS BLUEPRINTS
READY TO GO.
>> Reporter: PROJECT MANAGER
TRAVIS MILLER SAYS MORE THAN ONE
MILLION DOLLARS OF WORK IS IN
LIMBO.
SO THEY FROZE YOUR BUSINESS?
>> FROZEN BUSINESS.
NOT A DIME IN REVENUE HAS COME
IN OUR OFFICE SINCE DECEMBER
23.
>> Reporter: ADDING TO ITS
TROUBLES, SUNWORKS RECENTLY
SIGNED A THREE-YEAR LEASE FOR
MORE OFFICE SPACE AND A BIGGER
WAREHOUSE.
SO LITERALLY IT'S EMPTY FOR THE
NEXT, WELL, HOWEVER?
>> FOR THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE,
YEAH.
>> THERE'S NOT A SINGLE TRUCK
ARRIVING.
THERE'S NOT A SINGLE TRUCK
LEAVING.
>> BACK IN LAS VEGAS, AT
SOLARCITY, 550 JOBS ARE GONE.
>> THIS WAS BUSTLING.
PEOPLE WERE COMING IN AND OUT,
TRUCKS IN AND OUT.
THIS WAS ONE OF OUR BEST
WAREHOUSES IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: NONE OF THE
EXISTING 17,000 NEVADA
HOMEOWNERS WHO ALREADY HAVE
ROOFTOP SOLAR PANELS, LIKE PAT
AND CRAIG CARRELL, ARE EXEMPT
FROM THE NEW SOLAR RATES.
THEY WILL SEE THEIR ENERGY BILLS
GO UP.
>> IT'S NOT THE RULES THAT WE
BOUGHT INTO, THEY CHANGED THE
GAME ON US.
THAT WAS HARD-EARNED SAVINGS,
BUT WE DECIDED IT WAS WORTH IT
TO PUT IT UP ON OUR ROOF, TO
HAVE THAT KIND OF ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE, AND NOW IT SEEMS
LIKE IT'S GONE.
>> WE HAVE CREATED A GENERATOR
OUT HERE, WE'RE LIKE A LITTLE
POWER COMPANY, THAT THEY DID NOT
HAVE TO PAY FOR.
>> Reporter: YOU PUT IT UP?
>> I PUT IT UP.
I BUILT THE PLANT, AND THEY'RE
DERIVING THE BENEFIT FROM IT.
>> Reporter: THE PUBLIC UTILITY
COMMISSION'S REGULATORY
OPERATIONS STAFF DIRECTOR
REJECTS THE NOTION THAT SOLAR
HOMEOWNERS ARE BEING UNFAIRLY
PENALIZED WITH RETROACTIVE RATE
CHANGES.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY GOT
THE IDEA THAT THEY WERE GOING TO
HAVE A DEAL.
THE UTILITIES INTERCONNECTION
AGREEMENT THAT I READ SAYS THAT
THE LAW CAN CHANGE AND THE RATES
CAN CHANGE.
>> Reporter: IN THE MEANTIME,
ROOFTOP SOLAR INSTALLATIONS HAVE
EFFECTIVELY GROUND TO A HALT IN
NEVADA.
ASHLEY BROWN OF THE HARVARD
ELECTRICITY POLICY GROUP ARGUES
NET METERING-- THE PAYING OF
SOLAR PANEL OWNERS A FULL RETAIL
RATE FOR THEIR EXCESS POWER--
HAS OUTGROWN ITS USEFULNESS.
>> IT WAS NEVER MEANT TO BE A
PERMANENT SUBSIDY.
WHY WOULD WE DEVISE A
PERMANENT SUBSIDY FOR ANY
TECHNOLOGY?
IF YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE A
SUBSIDY, IT'S SHORT TERM.
IT'S DESIGNED TO GET THINGS PAST
THE COMMERCIAL HUMP.
SOLAR COSTS ARE DECLINING
RAPIDLY.
IT'S PAST THE COMMERCIAL HUMP.
>> WE WOULD DESIGN A SYSTEM AT
THIS SIZE FIRST.
>> Reporter: BACK IN SOLARCITY'S
NEW NATIONAL CALL CENTER IN LAS
VEGAS, THE COMPANY IS SUDDENLY
IN THE ODD POSITION OF REACHING
OUT TO CUSTOMERS ALMOST
EVERYWHERE EXCEPT NEVADA.
>> IT SHOULD BE UP TO THE PUBLIC
TO DECIDE.
>> Reporter: AND LAID-OFF SOLAR
WORKERS, BACKED BY SOLARCITY,
HOPE THE STATE'S VOTERS WILL
RESTORE THE PREVIOUS RATES FOR
ROOFTOP SOLAR.
>> SORRY YOU LOST YOUR JOB.
>> Reporter: THEY ARE GATHERING
SIGNATURES, HOPING TO GET A
REFERENDUM ON THE BALLOT IN
NOVEMBER.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE FILM
WORLD TURNS ITS ATTENTION TO
HOLLYWOOD AND THE 88th ANNUAL
ACADEMY AWARDS TONIGHT, WE TAKE
A LOOK AT ONE EMERGING FILMMAKER
WHOSE FIRST FEATURE HAS EARNED
HIM CRITICAL ACCLAIM AND
PROVIDES AN UNEXPECTED LOOK AT
HIS NATIVE COUNTRY OF ETHIOPIA.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IN THE OPENING
SCENES OF "LAMB," A YOUNG BOY
WANDERS THROUGH BREATHTAKING,
GREEN LANDSCAPES.
IT'S NOT A PLACE MOST PEOPLE
WOULD RECOGNIZE AS ETHIOPIA.
>> IT'S AN UNKNOWN AND
UNFORTUNATELY MISUNDERSTOOD PART
OF THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: "LAMB" IS 37-YEAR-
OLD WRITER AND DIRECTOR YARED
ZELEKE'S FIRST FEATURE FILM.
IT'S A TALE OF LEAVING HOME AND
INNOCENCE LOST.
AND AN ODE TO THE BEAUTY AND
CULTURAL RICHNESS OF THE
ZELEKE'S NATIVE LAND, ETHIOPIA,
A NATION OF 100 MILLION PEOPLE
IN EAST AFRICA.
THE FILM LANDED ZELEKE ON THE
RED CARPET AT THE CANNES FILM
FESTIVAL, THE FIRST TIME AN
ETHIOPIAN FILM WAS SELECTED TO
BE SCREENED AT THE PRESTIGIOUS
EVENT.
IT ALSO PUT ZELEKE ON "VARIETY"
MAGAZINE'S "10 SCREENWRITERS TO
WATCH" LIST.
THE FILM IS ABOUT THIS NINE-
YEAR-OLD BOY, EPHRAIM, WHO
LEAVES HOME TO LIVE WITH HIS
UNCLE, AFTER HIS MOTHER HAS DIED
DURING A DROUGHT.
HIS FATHER NEEDS TO FIND WORK IN
ADDIS ABABA, THE COUNTRY'S
CAPITAL.
>> Reporter: HIS UNCLE THREATENS
TO SLAUGHTER EPHRAIM'S BELOVED
PET LAMB FOR FOOD.
THE BOY IS MISERABLE AND ALONE.
>> Reporter: ZELEKE SAYS
EPHRAIM'S STORY IS LIKE HIS OWN.
HE LEFT ETHIOPIA AT AGE 10,
ESCAPING THE FAMINE AND CIVIL
WAR OF THE MID-1980'S FOR
WASHINGTON, D.C., TO LIVE WITH
HIS FATHER, WHOM HE BARELY KNEW.
>> EVERYBODY THOUGHT I WAS THE
LUCKIEST KID.
THEY CALLED ME THE "LUCKY ONE."
AND AMERICA WAS A GOLDEN KEY.
IT WAS A DREAM.
BUT FOR ME, IT WAS A NIGHTMARE
BECAUSE I LEFT BEHIND EVERYONE I
KNEW AND LOVED.
>> Reporter: ZELEKE WANTED THE
FILM NOT ONLY TO TELL HIS STORY,
BUT TO REVEAL ETHIOPIA'S
LANDSCAPE, RICH TRADITIONS, AND
RELIGIOUS DIVERSITY.
>> AND IT'S SOMETHING YOU DON'T
HEAR FROM, ABOUT ETHIOPIA OR
AFRICA IN GENERAL, THIS
BEAUTIFUL WAY OF BEING.
>> Reporter: ZELEKE'S 50-PERSON
CREW, MOSTLY ETHIOPIAN, FILMED
FOR 36 DAYS IN REMOTE,
MOUNTAINOUS AREAS THAT LACKED
ELECTRICITY.
>> THE LOCAL FARMERS DIDN'T
REALLY KNOW WHAT WE WERE DOING.
WE WERE, LIKE ALIENS WITH
STRANGE OBJECTS COMING TO DO
SOME UNKNOWN EXPERIMENT.
SO IT TOOK A WHILE TO GAIN THEIR
TRUST.
>> Reporter: ALL THE ACTORS ARE
ETHIOPIAN, BUT FEW HAD EVER
ACTED PROFESSIONALLY BEFORE.
ZELEKE AUDITIONED 7,000 PEOPLE,
HALF OF THEM KIDS.
SOME SCENES ARE PARTLY
UNSCRIPTED, LIKE A TRADITIONAL
COFFEE CEREMONY.
>> AND I HAD TO JUST TELL THEM,
"YOU KNOW, FORGET THE CAMERA.
AND HAVE YOUR NORMAL
CONVERSATION ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
YOUR ANIMALS OR THE UPCOMING
HOLIDAY AND THINGS LIKE THAT."
>> Reporter: THE FILM ALSO
TOUCHES ON ETHIOPIA'S PERSISTENT
CHALLENGES, LIKE DROUGHT AND
FAMINE...
>> Reporter: ...WHICH THREATEN
THE COUNTRY EVEN TODAY."
LAMB" ALSO CRITICIZES ASPECTS
OF THE CULTURE, LIKE TRADITIONAL
GENDER ROLES.
THE UNCLE MOCKS EPHRAIM FOR
LIKING TO COOK.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER SCENES,
EPHRAIM'S TEENAGE COUSIN TSION
IS PRESSURED TO MARRY AND HAVE
CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD, SHE SPENDS
HER TIME READING THE NEWSPAPER
AND DREAMING OF GOING TO
COLLEGE.
TSION EVENTUALLY RUNS AWAY,
WHICH ZELEKE SAYS IS THE TRUE
STORY OF MANY YOUNG ETHIOPIANS
WHO FLEE HOME IN SEARCH OF A
BETTER LIFE.
>> THEY DEFY THE GENDER ROLES.
AND, OF COURSE, THAT WAS
INTENTIONAL ON MY PART BECAUSE
THESE YOUNG KIDS, FOR ME, ARE
WHAT I HOPE FOR THE FUTURE OF
ETHIOPIA, AN ETHIOPIA THAT'S
MORE EDUCATED, THAT'S MORE EQUAL
AMONG THE DIFFERENT GENDERS AND
THAT'S MORE FREE.
>> Reporter: "LAMB" WILL SCREEN
AT FILM FESTIVALS THROUGHOUT THE
U.S. THIS SPRING, AND BE
AVAILABLE ON iTUNES, AMAZON AND
ON DVD LATER THIS YEAR.
ZELEKE SAYS HE HOPES HIS TALE
ABOUT GROWING UP AND FINDING
YOUR WAY WILL RESONATE WITH
AUDIENCES HERE, AS IT HAS
ABROAD.
>> THAT'S REALLY PART OF WHAT I
WANT TO DO IS TO CONNECT US ALL
AS AN ETHIOPIAN, AS AN AMERICAN
SAYING, "YOU KNOW, THERE ARE ALL
THESE DIFFERENCES.
BUT FUNDAMENTALLY, WE'RE PRETTY
MUCH THE SAME."
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN IRAQ, ISIS
HAS CARRIED OUT ASSAULTS ON
IRAQI SOLDIERS AND CIVILIANS IN
BAGHDAD TODAY.
ISIS ATTACKED IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES AT A BASE ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF THE CAPITAL AND
KILLED 12 GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS,
ACCORDING TO IRAQI OFFICIALS,
BEFORE SOLDIERS REPELLED THE
ATTACK.
ISIS ALSO CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR TODAY'S TWIN SUICIDE
BOMBINGS IN A CROWDED OUTDOOR
MARKET.
TWO ATTACKERS RIDING MOTORCYCLES
BLEW THEMSELVES UP, KILLING AT
LEAST 70 PEOPLE AND WOUNDING
MORE THAN 100.
EARLY RESULTS IN IRAN'S NATIONAL
ELECTION SHOW MODERATES ALIGNED
WITH INCUMBENT PRESIDENT HASSAN
ROUHANI SWEEPING ALL 30
PARLIAMENT SEATS CONTESTED IN
THE CAPITAL, TEHRAN.
WHILE HIS PARTY IS NOT EXPECTED
TO WIN A MAJORITY OF IRAN'S 290-
SEAT PARLIAMENT, THE RESULTS
COULD BE VALIDATION FOR ROUHANI,
WHO REACHED THE SANCTIONS-
LIFTING NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
DEAL.
FINAL RESULTS FROM FRIDAY'S VOTE
ARE NOT EXPECTED BEFORE
TOMORROW.
ASTRONAUT SCOTT KELLY RETURNS TO
EARTH TUESDAY AFTER 340
CONSECUTIVE DAYS IN SPACE, A
RECORD FOR AN AMERICAN.
THIS IS A PHOTO OF YESTERDAY'S
SUNRISE FROM KELLEY, WHO'S BEEN
SHARING IMAGES ON TWITTER.
THIS WAS HIS LAST MOON PHOTO
POSTED TODAY FROM ABOARD THE
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION.
NASA SAYS KELLY'S 12 MONTHS IN
SPACE WILL HELP PREPARE
ASTRONAUTS FOR A POSSIBLE
MISSION TO MARS.
SEE MORE OF SCOTT KELLY'S
MISSION THIS WEDNESDAY ON PBS,
IN PART ONE OF "A YEAR IN
SPACE."
>> THERE'S NO SUN ON YOUR FACE.
YOU NEVER FEEL THIS COLD BREEZE,
IT'S ALWAYS EXACTLY THE SAME.
>> SCOTT KELLY IS SPENDING A
YEAR IN SPACE, TRAVELING OVER
139 BILLION MILES.
>> IF THE TRAGIC THING WAS TO
HAPPEN, I THINK IT'S WORTH IT.
BEING PART OF SOMETHING LARGER
THAN YOURSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
OSCARS AREN'T THE ONLY MOVIE HON
HONORS N ANNUAL PREOSCAR RITUAL
THE GOLDEN RASP BERRY AWARDS FOR
HOLLYWOOD'S WORST WERE HANDED
OUT LAST KNIGHT.
THE STEAMY BOX OFFICE HIT 50
SHADES OF GRAY WAS NAMED WORST
MOVIE IN A TIE WITH THE
SUPERHERO FLOP FANTASTIC FOUR.
FOLLOW TONIGHT'S ACADEMY AWARDS
WITH US ON TWITTER AND ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
ON TOMORROW NIGHT'S NEWSHOUR,
THE LATEST ON THE RACIAL FOR THE
WHITE HOUSE AS CANDIDATES DASH
ACROSS THE WIDENING ELECTION MAP
BEFORE SUPER TUESDAY.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN, GOOD NIGHT.